                                                                                 TASK-3-VULNERABILITY SCAN USING NESSUS ESSENTIALS
                                                                        
Introduction:
For this task, I performed a vulnerability assessment using Nessus Essentials.
The installation, configuration, and scanning procedures were executed on a Linux (Kali Linux) machine, which served as both the scanner host and the scan target.
                                                                                    STEP-1: NESSUS INSTALLATION GUIDE (LINUX)
                                                                                    1. Install Nessus Essentials – Kali Linux

Step 1: Download Nessus
Visited Tenable’s official download page:
https://www.tenable.com/products/nessus/
Download Nessus:
Selected linux → Downloaded the .exe installer.
Registered with email on the Nessus website → Received an Activation Code.

Step 2: Install Nessus
I opened the terminal and navigated to the Downloads directory:
cd Downloads
ls
After confirming the Nessus package was downloaded, it was installed using:
sudo dpkg -i <nessus-package-name>.deb

Step 3: Start Nessus Service
sudo systemctl start nessusd.service
Enabled at boot:
sudo systemctl enable nessusd.service

Step 4: Access Web Interface
Opened the browser and went to:
https://localhost:8834
Selected Nessus Essentials → Entered Activation Code → Created user account.
Waited 20–45 minutes for the plugin download.

                                                                                     STEP 2: Find Your Local Machine IP (Linux)

Ran in terminal:
ip addr show
The output showed something like:
inet 192.168.1.22
This was the IP of the system that was used in the scan.

                                                                                         STEP 3: Create a New Scan in Nessus

Step 1: Went to the Nessus Scans Dashboard
Clicked New Scan
Chose Basic Network Scan

Step 2: Configure Scan
Filled the required fields:

Name:Local Machine Vulnerability Scan
Targets:192.168.x.x (Linux machine IP) OR localhost

Step 3: Save & Launch
Clicked Save
Clicked Launch Scan

Conlusion:
The scan was started and took 30 to 60 minutes to complete.
After the scan results were generated, the vulnerabilities were identified and categorized based on severity.
The remediation steps provided by Nessus for each vulnerability were reviewed.
All important findings were documented clearly.
The complete process and all vulnerabilities found were captured as screenshots or screen recordings.
These screenshots were uploaded to a separate files in this Git repository for reference and also analyzed the vulnerability report based on the severity and provided mitigation
